Fisheries Research 272 (2024) 106932
Available online 14 January 2024
0165-7836/© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/).Estimating angler effort and catch from a winter recreational fishery using a
novel Bayesian methodology to integrate multiple sources of creel
survey data
Caroline M. Tucker a,*, Simone Collier a, Geoffrey Legault b, George E. Morgan a, Derrick K. de
Kerckhove a
a Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry, Aquatic Research and Monitoring Section, 2140 East Bank Drive, Peterborough, ON K9L 1Z8, Canada
b Unaffiliated, Toronto, ON, Canada
A R T I C L E I N F O
Handled by: Russell B Millar
Keywords:
Survey design
Fisheries management
Catch rates
Fishing effort
Bayesian statistics
A B S T R A C T
The range of survey methodologies for measuring daily activity, catch and harvest (i.e. creel surveys) of recre-
ational anglers, is increasing with the advent of new technologies and improvements in remote sensing. Indi-
vidual creel survey types frequently give different insights into a fishery due to their unique sources of
methodological bias and coverage, which creates a problem for resource managers since markedly different
estimates of important fishery metrics can result. We demonstrate a joint estimation approach using a Bayesian
statistical framework that can bring together multiple survey types to derive a single estimate for important
metrics. This framework is applied to data collected from a relatively large winter fishery and integrates three
traditional creel methodologies (i.e. roving, access and aerial counts), each with very different sources of bias, to
derive a common estimate of angler effort. Models integrating two survey types are found to be have lower
uncertainty in their estimates. Further, reductions in effort for any one survey type is found to be buffered by the
joint estimation approach, such that resource managers will likely find benefits in using more than one survey
methodology in an integrated fashion to monitor a fishery.
1. Introduction
Recreational fisheries are dynamic systems which reflect the shifting
ecological, climatic, logistical, and socioeconomic conditions in a vari-
ety of predictable and unexpected ways (Arlinghaus et al., 2013; Hansen
et al., 2015; Hunt et al., 2013). Effective management of these fisheries
relies on monitoring activities such as index netting programs and angler
surveys (i.e. creels) to ensure managers have accurate, current data on
both aquatic resources and angler behaviour (Arlinghaus et al., 2013;
Hansen et al., 2015). Traditionally creel surveys monitor angler location
and timing, effort, catch, and harvest (Committee on the Review of
Recreational Fisheries Survey Methods, 2006), and on many lakes, creel
programs provide long-term records of fishing activity (e.g. Rypel et al.,
2016). However, current challenges for creel programs may reduce the
robustness of traditional approaches (Hansen et al., 2015; Hunt and
Moore, 2006). For example, changing environmental conditions are
creating novel constraints on winter ice fisheries: with rising tempera-
tures due to climate change, many lakes have more variable ice-on and
ice-off dates and fewer days with safe ice, which limits on-ice contact
surveys. More generally, budgetary limitations, safety concerns, and
geographic demands may limit the efficacy of in-person surveys. All of
these factors highlight the need to re-evaluate longstanding recreational
creel sampling frameworks. And while alternative approaches to con-
tact, interview-based surveys exist—including aerial and drone surveys
(e.g. Parker et al., 2006; Smucker et al., 2010), contact video recordings
(e.g. Smallwood et al., 2012; van Poorten et al., 2015), and web- and
phone-based applications (e.g. Venturelli et al., 2017)—it is not always
clear how or when new measures of recreational fisheries can be inte-
grated into existing creel programs.
There are two traditional approaches to contact interviews that
collect recreational effort, catch, and harvest information: roving and
access creels. Roving creels involve instantaneous activity counts and
interviews of anglers made by a mobile crew comprehensively surveying
the full landscape (e.g. Essig and Holliday, 1991; Malvestuto, 1983;
Pollock et al., 1994). Because roving creels are mobile, they can reflect
spatial patterns in activity and access a lake’s entire fishery, although
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: carolinemtucker@gmail.com (C.M. Tucker).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Fisheries Research
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/fishres
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fishres.2023.106932
Received 13 August 2023; Received in revised form 18 December 2023; Accepted 22 December 2023
Fisheries Research 272 (2024) 106932
2covering very large landscapes is prohibitive. Roving creels are assumed
to provide an unbiased estimator of daily fishing effort (Robson, 1961;
Robson, 1991), although any information on trip duration, catch, and
harvest can be incomplete since anglers are intercepted at some fraction
of their fishing trip (e.g. Essig and Holliday, 1991; Malvestuto, 1983;
Pollock et al., 1994). As such, the survey’s representation of angler and
trip characteristics is not unbiased: the probability of interviewing any
angler is proportional to their trip length (Robson, 1961). Furthermore,
catch rates and trip length may not be independent (Pollock et al.,
1994), and if catch rates change throughout the day (such as if fish
behaviour varies temporally), incomplete trips will have imperfect es-
timates of catch rates.
The second type of contact survey are access creels, which use sur-
veyors located at fixed locations to interview anglers leaving the fishery
at the completion of their trip (Robson and Jones, 1989). Catch rate can
be estimated directly without bias, since access creels gather complete
trip information, and there is a body of literature informing the timing,
pattern, and order of interviews (Pollock et al., 1997; Rasmussen et al.,
1998; Robson and Jones, 1989). However, access creel surveys are likely
to under-sample effort, depending on the number and location of access
locations, since most shorelines have many unofficial additional access
points. As with roving creels, surveying large landscapes can be
expensive and time-consuming.
Alternate or complimentary approaches to contact interviews exist
for estimating effort and catch. Aerial surveys, and more recently, drone
flights, can provide information on angler effort at the whole landscape
scale (Dainys et al., 2022; Lester and Dunlop, 2004; Parker et al., 2006).
Time-lapse photography or video, counts of traffic, or counts of parked
vehicles can also provide information on effort without incurring
continuous staffing costs, although start-up costs and expertise re-
quirements may be high (Steffe et al., 2008; van Poorten et al., 2015).
Information on effort, catch and harvest can also be obtained via
self-reporting methods such as catch cards, logbooks, mail and phone
reports or technologies such as smartphone apps (Essig and Holliday,
1991; Pollock et al., 1994; Venturelli et al., 2017). These approaches can
be effective if managed well (e.g. Cooke et al., 2000) but are prone to
various forms of self-reporting biases (Essig and Holliday, 1991;
Weithman and Haverland, 1991).
Recreational creel programs may use several survey types, but
typically each survey type provides separate information that are com-
bined after the fact. For example, aerial surveys may be used to measure
effort while telephone surveys provide catch and harvest rates (Pollock
et al., 1994; Smallwood et al., 2012). If two different approaches are
used to collect similar data (i.e. using both roving and aerial surveys to
measure effort), it is typically in order to validate one approach with the
other (e.g. Smucker et al., 2010) or to cover temporally and spatially
distinct aspects of a fishery (Smallwood et al., 2012). It is much less
common for a program to use multiple data collection techniques and
combine these to provide a joint estimate of a single index (but see
Trudeau et al., 2021). Combining survey types has the potential to
overcome the practical and structural limitations of individual ap-
proaches, but the appropriate methodologies for comparing or
combining approaches are unclear.
One key source of differences between surveys of different types is
that they vary in terms of when and for how long they sample a fishery,
and so total activity or effort, catch rates, and angler characteristics can
vary accordingly (Parker et al., 2006; Smallwood et al., 2012). Ac-
counting for these temporal differences is essential when comparing and
combining different survey measures (Lester and Dunlop, 2004; Lester
et al., 1991). However, existing approaches to accounting for temporal
differences are idiosyncratic: time is often treated as covariate or strata
which simplifies continuous variation (Smallwood et al., 2012; Soupir
et al., 2006; van Poorten et al., 2015) or else measures from one time
point are expanded or scaled to describe expectations over a longer time
period (Lester and Dunlop, 2004). Measures of recreational fishing ac-
tivity might be best compared by relating them via a continuous
distribution of activity over the course of a day, but such an approach
remains to be formalized.
Lake Nipissing is the second largest inland recreational fishery in the
Canadian province of Ontario, supporting more than 25,000 recrea-
tional anglers primarily for a multi-species winter ice fishery (Hunt
et al., 2023). Nipissing’s aquatic resources are shared across summer
and winter fisheries as well as a rights-based commercial fishery and it is
intensively managed, particularly with respect to key species such as
Walleye (Sander vitreus), Yellow Perch (Perca flavescens), Northern Pike
(Esox lucius), and Lake Whitefish (Coregonus clupeaformis). The winter
ice fishery has been surveyed with roving creels (snowmobiles) contin-
uously annually since 1976. However, in recent years, budgetary con-
straints make extensive roving creels difficult to justify, and increasingly
unsafe ice conditions complicate scheduling. In response, managers
added access creels and aerial surveys, however these are analyzed
separately from roving creel data, giving measures of effort and catch
that differ depending on survey type. To support the ongoing manage-
ment efforts on Lake Nipissing this study seeks to address 1) whether
models which account for continuous variation in the timing of surveys
can be used to facilitate integration of multiple survey methods; 2)
whether roving creels could be more efficiently applied when combined
with data from additional survey methods; and 3) whether incorpo-
rating multiple types of data helps to improve the understanding of this
large and important fishery.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Data
The winter recreational ice fishing season on Lake Nipissing opens on
January 1st and closes on March 15th. In 2023, the Ontario Ministry of
Natural Resources and Forestry (MNRF) conducted three types of sur-
veys of this winter fishery: roving creels, access site creels, and aerial
surveys on the lake(Table 1). (All three survey types were performed in
2021 and 2022 as well but with less replication). Nine access sites were
used for access creels, and for roving creels and aerial surveys, the lake is
divided into 17 sectors (Fig. 1) with data reported per sector.
2.1.1. Access creel
Access surveys occurred at nine access sites around the northern and
eastern shoreline of Lake Nipissing (Fig. 1) with the sampling starting
around 12:45 pm and ending no later than 6:45 pm in January and
7:15 pm in February and March. These times have historically been
chosen to represent peak times for angling parties leaving the lake after
fishing. Crew remained at an access site for between one to six hours and
recorded the ‘total activity’ (number of angling parties leaving the ac-
cess site) and interviewed as many parties as possible on each hourly
time interval (i.e., 12:45 pm to 13:45 pm, 13:45 to 14:45 pm, etc.). They
recorded the time of the interview, trip start and end times, catch and
harvest, party size, and fishing mode (personal ice hut, commercially
managed recreational ice hut or on-ice angler with or without portable
shelter). Creels were approximately evenly split between workdays and
non-workdays. Note that not all parties counted were interviewed.
2.1.2. Roving creel
Roving creels were done on-site with two crew members on snow-
mobiles and typically covered 2–3 sectors in a given day, with the main
limitation being daylight hours. All parties in a sector were counted
(‘total activity’), including all active commercially managed recrea-
tional huts, active personal huts, and on-ice angling parties (with or
without portable ice shelter), and angling parties were interviewed as
they were encountered. Crew recorded the time of the interview, trip
start time, catch and harvest, and party size. In addition, parties were
asked to estimate when they expected to end their fishing trip. Creels
were approximately evenly split between workdays and non-workdays.
Note that not all parties counted were interviewed.
C.M. Tucker et al.
Fisheries Research 272 (2024) 106932
32.1.3. Aerial survey
Manned aerial surveys covered all 17 ice sectors per flight, with a
trained onboard observer recording the ‘total activity’ (counts of all
active huts, both personal and commercially operated, as well as the
number of anglers fishing on the ice) per sector. The timing of each
sector-level count was recorded. Half of flights were scheduled for
mornings (start times between 10:00 am – 12:00 am) and half for af-
ternoons (start times between 1:00 pm – 3:00 pm) (Table 1). Flights
were also varied between workdays and non-workdays.
Active huts in both roving surveys and aerial counts were distin-
guished from empty huts based on the presence of snowmobiles, ATVS,
or trucks/cars parked nearby; exhaust from gas or wood heating; and/or
presence of individuals seen inside or outside.
2.1.4. Spatial relationships
In order to describe the geographic relationship between access points
and roving creel ice sectors, on-ice creel surveyors in 2022 asked anglers
to identify the point on a map where they had accessed the ice. This
process repeated in 2023 using an electronic tablet to record the loca-
tional information. In 2023, access creel surveyors also asked anglers to
point on a map at the roving creel sector where they fished on that trip.
Both the access and roving datasets described quantitatively similar
pairwise access site-ice sector relationships, and so they were combined
into a single matrix describing the proportion of anglers at a given access
site which come from a given ice sector (Supplementary Info Table S1).
Table 1
Overview of 2023 on-site surveys of the winter recreational fishery on Lake Nipissing.
# of Sites or Sectors for lake # Unique Days Surveyed Total # surveys Total # angling parties interviewed Earliest survey time Latest survey time
Access Creel 9 26 246 323 12:48 7:10
Roving Creel 17 20 73 305 11:12 5:30
Aerial Survey 17 8 120 NA 10:33 3:34
Table 2
Results from the effort module which uses angling party activity from surveys to
estimate effort (total number of angling parties present) for the full 2023 winter
recreational fishing season on Lake Nipissing. The means and standard de-
viations for each model type are calculated across 4000 posterior samples.
Models are fit using the access-derived activity curve (1) or the roving-derived
activity curve (2) (see Methods for further details).
# of Parties
1. Access activity curve 2. Roving activity curve
Model type μ σ2 μ σ2
Access only 12,169 366 17,237 601
Aerial + Access 11,528 14 12,555 93
Roving only 39,192 3,322 46,389 3,797
Roving + Aerial 20,877 1,050 25,100 1,241
Roving + Access 22,079 183 27,782 305
Fig. 1. Map showing Lake Nipissing, Ontario Canada. Points show the location of the nine access creel sites (bullets) for the winter of 2023. Ice sectors used to guide
roving and aerial surveys are denoted W1-W8 (west side of the lake) and E1-E6 (east side).
C.M. Tucker et al.
Fisheries Research 272 (2024) 106932
42.2. Modelling
The model of the Nipissing recreational winter fishery was composed
of three modules: 1) functions describing angling effort – the total
number of anglers expected at an access site or on an ice sector on a
given day type; 2) functions describing trip duration and party size; and
3) functions describing catch and harvest rate. Total catch (or harvest)
for the fishery for the winter season combines the output from the three
modules with seasonal information as:
TotalCatch = ∑
d=DayType
(Effortd × #Daysd) × TripDuration × PartySize
× CatchRate
Details on model parameters and associated priors can be found in
Table S2.
2.2.1. Effort module
Different data types—alone or in combination—can be used to run
the effort module. We explore effort modules composed of different
combinations of access survey, roving survey, or aerial count data.
Specifically, effort modules composed as access-only, access -aerial,
roving-access, roving-aerial, and roving-only data combinations will be
compared. Details on their construction follows.
We assume that for each lake access site/ice sector i and day type j,
there are ni,j angling parties that could be counted by observers if they
spend the full day counting parties. Day type is either 0 (workday) or 1
(non-workday). Effort per day type is therefore the sum of all ni,j angling
parties. These parameters ni,j are partially pooled such that they are
drawn from the same normal distribution (left truncated at 0):
ni,j ∼ Normal
(
nmuj , σ2
site/sector
)
T[0, ] (1)
where nmuj is the average number of angling parties at lake access sites or
ice sectors on day type j and σ2
site/sector is the variation among access sites/
ice sectors. The average number of angling parties on day type j is equal to
nmuj = nmue(βdaytype j), where βdaytype is the effect of non-workdays (j = 1).
In reality, observers were not spending full days counting parties at
access sites/ice sectors and so we must relate these “potential” full-day
counts to the actual activity count data collected from surveys spanning
comparatively short time intervals (i.e., counts from roving or access
surveys). To do so, we apply survival analysis (i.e., time to event anal-
ysis) by assuming that all ni,j angling parties arrive on the lake at the
start of a fishing day and that parties leaves the ice, or “die” with some
probability that depends on the time of day. Assuming that angling starts
at 6:30 am and ends before 8:30 pm, these times can be rescaled to 0 and
1 respectively, and the probability of leaving the ice can then be
described by a beta distribution with shape parameters (α, β). We use a
beta distribution because of its flexible shape: the probability of ending
angling trips can be relatively uniform across the day, more likely in the
morning/afternoon, or highly concentrated within a short time interval,
for example between 5 pm and 6 pm. This flexibility means that the
assumption that all trips start at 6:30 am is somewhat forgiving, espe-
cially if the parameterization has most trips ending later in the day (i.e.,
α values are high relative to β).
Given the above model, it follows that the probability of observing an
angling party still on the ice at time t (i.e., observing a party whose trip is
still “surviving”) when the observation is instantaneous, or nearly so, is
the survival function S(t) of the beta distribution:
p(T = t|α, β) = S(t|α, β) (2)
Similarly, for observations within an interval [t1, t2], the probability
of observing an angling party leaving is the difference between two
survival functions:
p(t1 < T < t2|α, β)i = S(t1|α, β)  S(t2|α, β) (3)
Therefore, depending on whether observations are instantaneous
(roving creels) or within an interval (access creels), we can use either
Eqs. 2 or 3 to link the total number of angling parties at access site i and
day type j, ni,j, with our observations of angling parties leaving the ice.
Specifically, if there are ni,j possible angling parties to observe and each
party has probability pt of not being observable at time t because they
have already left the ice, then the number of parties successfully
observed at time t, mt,i,j, has a binomial distribution:
mt,i,j ∼ Binomial ni,j, pt
) (4)
where pt is either Eqs. 2 or 3.
Eqs. 1–4 are sufficient for estimating ni,j with either roving or access
data (referred to as ‘roving-only’ and ‘access-only’ models). Below we
describe additions to these models that can utilize two data types to
estimate ni,j.
2.2.2. Roving-aerial model
Roving and aerial surveys count the same quantity (huts) at the same
spatial resolution (per sector). However, for a particular access site i and
day type j, such surveys will not necessarily align in terms of exact
counts. Therefore, to combine these data types into one model, we add
observation error to the model described in the previous section (Eqs.
1–4) such that the distribution of roving survey counts at time t, for
sector i, and day type j, qt,i,j, is:
qt,i,j ∼ Normal
(
mt,i,j , σ2
roving
)
(5)
where σ2
roving is variation from the true short-term count, mt,i,j, arising
from biases in roving surveys. Similarly, for aerial counts:
qt,i,j ∼ Normal mt,i,j , σ2
aerial
) (6)
where σ2
aerial is variation arising from biases in aerial surveys.
2.2.3. Roving-access and Aerial-access models
For these models, the two data sources involve different spatial
resolutions: access sites and ice sectors. Each access site is assumed to
contain some fraction of the angling parties from multiple sectors (e.g.,
an access site might contain 94% of all anglers from sector 1% and 1% of
anglers from 6 other sectors). To account for this, we estimate all sector-
level ni,j parameters, multiply these estimates by constants for each ac-
cess site (see Table S1), and finally sum them. Thus, we model roving or
aerial data with Eqs. 1–4 as usual, while for access data obtained from
access site h, we replace Eq. 4 with:
mt,h,j ∼ Binomial(vh, pt ) (4)
where vh is the sum vh = ∑
k
nk,jrk,h across all k sectors and rk,h is a con-
stant representing the fraction of angling parties from sector k associated
with access site h.
2.2.4. Fitting the effort module to data
For the access-only model we estimated the following: ni,j (9 access
sites), nmu, σ2
site, βdaytype, α, and β. For the roving-only model we esti-
mated: ni,j (14 sectors), nmu, σ2
sector, βdaytype, α, and β. In addition, to
understand the influence of different α, and β terms, we estimated pa-
rameters from the access-only model with α, and β fixed to match to the
values estimated from the roving-only model. We similarly estimated
parameters from the roving-only model with α, and β fixed to match to
the values estimated from the access-only model.
For the roving-aerial model we estimated: ni,j, nmu, σ2
sector, βdaytype,
σ2
roving, and σ2
aerial. For the roving-access and aerial-access models we
C.M. Tucker et al.
Fisheries Research 272 (2024) 106932
5estimated ni,j, nmu, σ2
sector, βdaytype. For each of these joint models, we
fixed α, and β and ran the models twice, once with values from the
access-only model and once with values from the roving-only model.
2.2.5. Trip characteristics module
The trip characteristics module provided descriptions of the party
size, rods per angler, and trip duration. Party size was modelled as a
Poisson distribution (Pois(λpartysize)), with expected number of anglers per
party. Trip duration was modelled as a normal distribution, with mean
duration (μ, hours) and variance σ2, Normal(μduration, σ2
duration). The trip
module was fit separately to the 2023 access interview data, and the 2023
roving interview data to provide a comparison of the trips described by
these two different survey types. Additionally, the 2023 roving trip data
was divided into responses from parties in commercially operated rec-
reational huts and from parties in personal ice huts to compare their
potential differences. The number of rods used per angler was modelled
as a normal distribution with μrods, and σ2
rods Values for λpartysize, μduration,
σ2
duration, μrods, and σ2
rods are estimated by the trip module.
2.2.6. Catch and harvest module
The catch and harvest module modelled catch and harvest rates with
a gamma-hurdle model to account for the large number of zeroes. The
catch rate (number of fish caught per hour, c) of species j for angling
party i:
P cji
) =
{ θCj cji = 0
 1  θCj
) • Gamma
(
cji⃒⃒ αCj , βCj
)
cji ∕= 0 (5)
where θCj is the probability of a catch of 0, and αCj , βCj are parameters
of the Gamma distribution. Harvest rate (number harvested/hour, h)
was modelled in the equivalent fashion. We fit the catch and harvest
module to the data collected during 2023 access interviews, and sepa-
rately to the data collected during the 2023 roving interviews. We report
catch and harvest rates for the four most commonly targeted species:
Walleye, Yellow Perch, Lake Whitefish, and Northern Pike. Values for ̂ cj ,
θC, αC, βC,̂ hj , θH, αH, andβH are estimated by the catch and harvest
module.
All modules were coded in the Stan Language (mc-stan.org) and
implemented using the cmdstanR package (https://mc-stan.org/c
mdstanr/). All Bayesian models were run with four independent
chains, each with 1000 warm-up samples and 1000 additional samples
for a total of 4000 samples. All chains converged to a stationary distri-
bution, as indicated by the Gelman and Rubin (1992) scale reduction
factor R ˆ < 1.1 and so the results presented here are presumed to be
robust.
2.3. Subsampling
We explored the impact of reducing roving creel frequency—as has
been suggested for Lake Nipissing for safety and budgetary reasons—on
the accuracy and precision of estimates of fishing effort. We compared
the impact of reducing roving creel interviews for the roving-only, the
roving-aerial, and roving-access models described above in the effort
module. The impact of reducing sampling frequency was simulated by
randomly removing 12.5%, 25%, 50%, or 75% of roving data (where
each data point represents an activity count made for a specific ice sector
on a specific day) and fitting the appropriate model to the reduced data
set. This approach may be slightly unrealistic, since particular sectors
are typically sampled together, but we ignore this for simplicity of
randomization. We replicated this process of randomly removing data
points 100 times for each level of the 12.5%, 25%, 50%, or 75%. Each
replicate model was run with one independent chain, with 1000 warm-
up samples and 1000 additional samples, and the mean and standard
deviation of the estimated total season’s effort was recorded.
3. Results
3.1. Data
In 2023, access creel surveys were carried out on a total of 26 days,
roving creel surveys on 20 days, and aerial surveys on eight days. This
resulted in 323 interviews of angling parties from access creels and 305
interviews from roving creels.
3.2. Effort module
The α and β terms of the beta distribution describing the probability
of angling trips ending (i.e., “activity profile”; see Eqs. 2–3 and associ-
ated text) were estimated for two different activity profiles, one for the
access-only model, and one for the roving-only model. Both the roving-
derived and access-derived activity profiles (based on the estimated
mean values of α and β) showed that the probability of an angling party
completing their trip increased throughout the day, with the average
trip ending at 4:33 pm in the access-derived profile and 5:14 pm for
roving-derived profile (Fig. 2). However, the access-derived profile
shows activity strongly peaking in the late afternoon, whereas the
roving-derived curve suggests activity is more dispersed.
These differences between the two activity curves in turn led to
differences in estimates of season effort. We estimated the total season’s
effort for each of five model types (representing different data sources or
combinations of data sources), for each of the two activity profiles. This
gave a total of 10 different estimates of season effort (Table 3; Fig. 3).
The roving-derived activity profile always had higher estimates of
effort (Table 3, column 1) compared to the access-derived activity pro-
file (Table 4, column 2) for the same model type. Across the model
types—representing different data sources—the roving-only model had
the highest estimate of activity (39,192 parties or 46,389 parties with
the activity- and roving-derived profiles respectively), many times
higher than the access-only model’s estimate (12,169 parties or 17,237
parties). Estimates for the remaining model types, which incorporated
two data sources, fell between these extremes. The roving-only and
roving-aerial models had much higher uncertainty (σ2) regardless of the
activity profile used, compared to the remaining models.
3.3. Trip characteristics module
The characteristics of a typical ice fishing trip on Nipissing depended
on whether it was modelled using roving interview or access interview
data (Table 5). Trips reported at access interviews had slightly fewer
anglers per party (2.4 versus 2.6). They also had longer average trip
duration (5.1 versus 2.8 h), which is not surprising given access
Fig. 2. Activity profiles derived from the access creel interviews (access-only
model, blue curve) or roving creel interviews (roving-only model, green curve).
The y-axis represents the probability density for observing an angling party
completing their trip; the x-axis represents the time of day.
C.M. Tucker et al.
Fisheries Research 272 (2024) 106932
6interviews reflect completed trips and roving interviews reflect inter-
rupted trips. When roving parties were asked to estimate their total trip
length, the average estimated trip length was 6.4 h. We also separated
the roving interview data by party type (Table 6) and fit the trip module
separately to each; we found that parties in commercially operated ice
huts tended to have longer interrupted and estimated trip durations and
larger party sizes compared to parties in personal ice huts and on-ice
parties.
3.4. Catch and harvest module
2023 catch and harvest rates for four of the most commonly targeted
species are shown in Table 6. Catch rates for Walleye were higher when
reported in access creel interviews as compared to roving creel in-
terviews, although harvest rates were fairly similar. Yellow perch catch
rates were higher when reported in roving interviews compared to ac-
cess interviews.
3.5. Subsampling
We explored the effect of reducing roving effort on the accuracy and
precision of estimates of effort (total number of parties per season)
(Figs. 4 and 5; Table 6) by reducing the roving data by 12.5%, 25%,
50%, or 75% with 100 replicate sub-samples per level. The mean esti-
mate of effort did not change for the roving-only model as the amount of
data used in the model was decreased, although the range of effort
values estimated across the replicates increased greatly (error bars in
Fig. 4). The roving-aerial and roving-access model had slight decreases
in the mean estimates of effort as roving data was reduced. The coeffi-
cient of variation associated with an estimate of effort more than
doubled at the highest level of reduction for the roving-only model. For
both roving-access and roving-aerial models, the coefficient of variation
did not increase significantly.
4. Discussion
Recreational fisheries may employ multiple types of surveys in order
to best capture features like angler effort, trip characteristics, and catch
and harvest rates for key species. Though different survey approaches
have varied strengths and weakness—costs and labour requirements,
spatial and temporal coverage of the fishery, and potential for angler
interviews—integrating their results to develop a holistic understanding
of a fishery is not straightforward. We use Lake Nipissing’s winter rec-
reational fishery as a case study and demonstrate a novel approach to
combining and comparing different survey data types. On Lake Nipiss-
ing, both access creels, roving creels, and aerial surveys of the winter
recreational fishery are performed concurrently, but they traditionally
are analyzed separately. However, different methods give different and
potentially incomparable estimates of effort, trip characteristics, catch
rates, and harvest rates. When we combined these data sets with an
explicit model of temporal patterns in daily angler activity, we were able
to obtain estimates of effort that incorporated multiple data types.
Further, when we simulated the impact of reducing roving creels (a
likely event as ice conditions become more variable on Lake Nipissing),
we found that these multi-data models provided consistent estimates of
effort with low uncertainty even under high levels of roving data
reduction.
The timing of creel surveys is recognized to be important (Lester and
Dunlop, 2004; Parker et al., 2006; Stamatopoulos, 2002), and is often
accounted for by sampling during the times most likely to be active or by
splitting days into strata (e.g. a.m. and p.m., daytime and nighttime)(e.g.
Trudeau et al., 2021). The activity profile approach used here has its
Table 3
Results from the trip characteristics module for the 2023 winter recreational
fishery on Lake Nipissing. Trip characteristics of party size, trip duration, and
their product - total effort per party – are calculated for each of the access and
roving interview data sets. ‘Roving interviews’ refers to the trip duration
calculated based on the interrupted trips, while ‘Roving interviews (estimated)’
refers to the trip duration calculated based on anglers’ estimated trip completion
times.
Access
interviews
Roving
interviews
Roving
interviews
(estimated)
μ σ2 μ σ2 μ σ2
Anglers per party (#) 2.4 0.04 2.6 0.10 2.6 0.10
Trip duration (hours) 5.1 0.06 2.8 0.09 6.4 0.10
Expected effort per party (angler-
hours)
12.2 0.24 7.2 0.35 16.5 0.67
Fig. 3. Estimates of total effort (# of angling parties over the 2023 winter ice fishing season on Lake Nipissing) for each of the different model types. Dark grey points
show the average estimate made when using the access-derived activity profile; light grey points show the average estimate made when using the roving-derived
activity profile. Error bars show the 95% confidence intervals around the mean estimate.
Table 4
Results from the trip characteristics module for each type of angling party,
calculated using data from roving interviews.
Personal Ice
Hut
Commercial Ice
Hut
Open Ice
Anglers
μ σ2 μ σ2 μ σ2
Anglers per party (#) 2.2 0.1 3.9 0.3 2.6 0.2
Trip duration (hr) 2.3 0.1 4.7 0.1 3.1 0.1
Trip duration (hr) - Estimated 8.8 4.1 11.3 0.1 6.1 0.1
C.M. Tucker et al.
Fisheries Research 272 (2024) 106932
7roots in these approaches and others, and shares with Lester and Dunlop
(2004) the description of angler activity as a continuous curve rather
than discrete strata. However, Lester and Dunlop (2004) recommend
sampling at the most active time and then using an appropriate expan-
sion coefficient to calculate the total daily effort, an approach that is
most straightforward if angler activity is centered on midday and sym-
metrical. The benefit of sampling and modelling the full day, as we
recommend, is to 1) allow better estimation of the shape of the daily
activity profile; 2) account for practical realities which prevent surveys
from only occurring during the most active times of the day; 3) in light of
2), allow surveys performed at varying times to be compared directly;
and 4) allow more accurate expansion of survey counts to estimate daily
activity. Modelling angler activity in this way provided important
insight into the biases associated with access and roving creel data sets
collected for the Nipissing fishery.
In general, the access-derived and roving-derived activity curves
described a similar pattern in which winter angling trips most frequently
end late in the afternoon. The late day peak in activity is related to the
popularity of the Walleye fishery: Walleye activity increases as light
levels decline leading to anglers not leaving until just before sunset
(Einfalt et al., 2012; Parker et al., 2006). Notably, the roving-derived
curve describes greater diversity in the timing of when anglers leave:
the reason for this difference is unrelated to the usual explanation for
higher effort from roving creels compared to access creels (i.e. that an-
glers that use unofficial access sites are missed). Instead, one difference
is driven by differences in survey times as on-ice surveys are more likely
to encounter angling parties completing short morning trips which may
be missed by late afternoon access creels. The additional difference is
due to the specifics of the Nipissing fishery, in that roving creels are able
to interview angling parties from commercially-operated ice huts, which
are not accessible to access creels (as commercially-operated ice huts use
private access points). Even if access creels could interview anglers using
commercially-operated huts, these anglers arrive earlier and stay later
(including overnight) on average and would be more likely to be missed
by access surveys. For these reasons, the roving-derived curve produces
higher estimates of effort which are likely more representative of the
true angling effort on Nipissing (Table 3). When we repeated the ana-
lyses described here using 2021 and 2022 data sets, we found that
Table 6
Results from simulations exploring the effect of reducing roving data in the roving-only, roving-aerial, and roving-access models of angling effort. Table shows the
mean estimate of season’s effort (μ) and the mean uncertainty for the estimate (σ2) across 100 replicates at 12.5%, 25%, 50%, and 75% reduction in roving data.
Model type Roving only Roving + Aerial Roving + Access
Average estimate of effort Average uncertainty (σ2) Average estimate of effort Average uncertainty (σ2) Average estimate of effort Average uncertainty (σ2)
Full data 46,389 3,797 25,126 1,306 27,782 307
12.5%
Decrease
46,076 3,829 24,285 1,220 27,544 337
25% Decrease 46,099 3,940 22,818 1,174 26,618 362
50% Decrease 45,836 4,463 22,333 1,079 26,435 448
75% Decrease 46,294 7,243 19,383 972 21,685 505
Fig. 4. Effect of reducing roving data on the mean estimate of season’s effort (total number of angling parties) for the winter recreational fishery on Lake Nipissing.
The y-axis shows the percent change in the estimate as compared to the estimate from the full data set (Table 6) and the error bars show the variation (σ2 in the mean
estimate across the 100 simulations). The effect of reducing roving effort was calculated for each of the model types that use roving creel data – the roving-only,
roving-access, and roving-aerial models. Note that points for different models are slightly offset on the x-axis for visibility.
Table 5
Results from the catch and harvest module. Catch and harvest rates (# fish/hour) for the four most commonly targeted fish species in the 2023 winter recreational
fishery on Lake Nipissing. Rates are shown based on access interview data (1) and roving interview data (2).
Catch rate Harvest rate
1. Access interviews 2. Roving interviews 1. Access interviews 2. Roving interviews
μ σ2 μ σ2 μ σ2 μ σ2
Walleye 0.531 0.0396 0.215 0.0231 0.069 0.0083 0.055 0.0089
Yellow Perch 0.176 0.0180 0.372 0.0375 0.100 0.0142 0.233 0.0259
Northern Pike 0.023 0.0040 0.024 0.0052 0.008 0.0025 0.012 0.0035
Lake Whitefish 0.006 0.0021 0.005 0.0021 0.002 0.0009 0.003 0.0017
C.M. Tucker et al.
Fisheries Research 272 (2024) 106932
8similar activity profiles (α and β parameter values) were estimated for
the roving-only and access-only models, suggesting that angling party
arrival time, end time, and overall trip length is a predictable behaviour,
and that α and β values estimated in one year may remain relevant for
multiple years.
Our approach to combining multiple data types into a single model
relied on one of two methods: 1) modelling the angling activity from
different sources as sharing a distribution since they were analogous but
not identical; or 2) modelling the measures from different sources as
representing analogous measures and differing only due to observation
error. When combining access data with either aerial or roving data,
counts made at the access site were treated as similar (but not inter-
changeable) to on-ice data sets using the first method. When combining
aerial and roving data types this latter approach was used, since both
produce seemingly interchangeable counts of on-ice activity. We found
that roving data gave the highest mean estimates of effort when it was
the only data source, and that combining roving survey data with either
access or aerial data led to lower mean estimates of overall effort
(Table 1). That this is true when modelling roving and aerial surveys
together is surprising, given that these measures are believed to capture
the same population of angling parties (counts of ice huts in a given
sector). Roving creel estimates of effort are also more variable when
considered alone compared to when combined with aerial surveys: this
may be because roving creels can visit only two sectors per day
compared to aerial surveys which cover all ice sectors concurrently.
Jointly estimating effort using the roving-access model gave lower es-
timates of effort with lower variability compared to the roving-model
alone. Access surveys are known to under-estimate effort because
there are also unofficial access sites along Lake Nipissing that are not
surveyed. However, it is promising that the roving-aerial and roving-
access model types give similar estimates of effort and have reduced
uncertainty as compared to roving alone. This suggests that combining
roving creel data with additional data sources can provide more reliable
and less variable estimates of effort.
We used a sub-sampling approach to further explore the implications
of potentially decreasing roving creels in the future. We found that the
mean estimates of effort were consistent with even large decreases in
roving surveys, provided multiple data sources were included in the
model. To some extent this is the result of the proportionally greater
decline in sample size in the roving-only model compared to the joint
models. However, this subsampling schema represents reasonable plans
for future surveys of the winter recreational creel on Nipissing. These
results suggest that – with significant budgetary savings – roving creels
can be reduced if either access or aerial surveys are maintained.
Similarly, if roving creels are maintained but become less reliable to
schedule due to ice safety, small decreases in replication might have
acceptable impacts on estimates of effort. The choice of maintaining
aerial surveys or access creels may depend on the associated costs: for
example, on Nipissing, access creels cost around $600.00 CAD per day
(including vehicle rentals, labour, training, and supplies) while aerial
surveys cost around $2000.00 CAD per flight (including labour, fuel and
flight). As a comparison, roving surveys cost ~$900.00 CAD per day
(including fuel, maintenance, and labour) (all pers comm.) Flights can
be somewhat inflexible to reschedule in inclement weather and start and
end times are limited by travel time. The higher cost of aerial surveys,
and the lack of in-person interviews, may lead to a preference for access
creels going forward. In terms of costs, drones may provide a less
expensive alternative to manned aerial surveys in the future.
Timing is also essential when comparing catch (and so harvest) rates
between different surveys, since catch rates are known to vary in rela-
tion to temporal patterns in predator activity, food availability, and fish
hunger (Kuparinen et al., 2010; Uusi-Heikkil¨a et al., 2008). Comparing
the timing of roving and access interviews helped to explain why they
differed so markedly in Walleye catch rates. Walleye activity and
foraging success increases with lowered light levels and so catch rates
are unsurprisingly much lower during the roving interviews, which
occur early in the day and mid-fishing trip. If roving creels are reduced
in the future, this suggests that using catch rates collected using the
alternative contact approach (access creels) might be preferable and
more reflective of full-trip catch rates.
5. Conclusions
Taken separately, any one of the survey types here gives a different
descriptions of Lake Nipissing’s winter recreational fishery. By ac-
counting for temporal trends in activity, catch, and party identity, we
show that it is possible to reconcile these differences and develop a more
holistic understanding of the fishery. The approach described here
provided some important insights into measurement of the Lake
Nipissing winter recreational fishery, including the importance of better
representing commercial huts in measures of effort, and the suggestion
from the roving data that angling activity is more dispersed throughout
the day than typically assumed. This description of angler activity over a
day forms the backbone of the model presented here: for a given activity
profile, different data sources describing effort, party characteristics,
and identity can then be incorporated. This allows an informed
approach which incorporates the most reflective data describing each
component (effort, trip characteristics, catch rate) of the fishery.
Fig. 5. Effect of reducing roving data on the precision (coefficient of variation, shown as a percentage of the mean) of the estimate of season’s effort (total number of
angling parties) for the winter recreational fishery on Lake Nipissing. The effect of reducing roving effort was calculated for each of the models containing roving
creel data – the roving-only, roving-access, and roving-aerial models.
C.M. Tucker et al.
Fisheries Research 272 (2024) 106932
9CRediT authorship contribution statement
Collier Simone: Data curation, Software. Tucker Caroline M:
Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Methodology, Soft-
ware, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – re-
view & editing. Legault Geoffrey: Conceptualization, Methodology,
Software, Writing – review & editing. de Kerckhove Derrick: Concep-
tualization, Data curation, Funding acquisition, Project administration,
Resources, Supervision, Writing – review & editing. Morgan George E:
Data curation, Formal analysis, Methodology, Project administration,
Writing – review & editing.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
Acknowledgements
Thanks are due to Michelle Gorrie (MNRF), Kim Tremblay (MNRF),
Nikki Commanda (Nipissing First Nation), Victoria Kopf (MNRF), Lee
Gutowsky (Fisheries and Oceans Canada), and Roxanne Boodhoo whose
contributions to the field activities made this project successful.
Appendix A. Supporting information
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the
online version at doi:10.1016/j.fishres.2023.106932.
References
Arlinghaus, R., Cooke, S.J., Potts, W., 2013. Towards resilient recreational fisheries on a
global scale through improved understanding of fish and fisher behaviour. Fish.
Manag. Ecol. 20, 91–98.
Committee on the Review of Recreational Fisheries Survey Methods, O.S.B. Review of
recreational fisheries survey methods: National Academies Press; 2006.
Cooke, S.J., Dunlop, W.I., Macclennan, D., Power, G., 2000. Applications and
characteristics of angler diary programmes in Ontario, Canada. Fish. Manag. Ecol. 7,
473–487.
Dainys, J., Gorfine, H., Mateos-Gonz´alez, F., Skov, C., Urbanaviˇcius, R., Audzijonyte, A.,
2022. Angling counts: harnessing the power of technological advances for
recreational fishing surveys. Fish. Res. 254, 106410.
Einfalt, L.M., Grace, E.J., Wahl, D.H., 2012. Effects of simulated light intensity, habitat
complexity and forage type on predator–prey interactions in walleye S ander vitreus.
Ecol. Freshw. Fish. 21, 560–569.
Essig, R.J., Holliday, M.C., 1991. Development of a recreational fishing survey: the
marine recreational fishery statistics survey case study. Creel and angler surveys in
fisheries management American Fisheries Society, Symposium. Bethseda, Maryland:
American Fisheries Society.
Hansen, G.J.A., Gaeta, J.W., Hansen, J.F., Carpenter, S.R., 2015. Learning to manage and
managing to learn: sustaining freshwater recreational fisheries in a changing
environment. Fisheries 40, 56–64.
Hunt, L.M., Moore, J., 2006. The potential impacts of climate change on recreational
fishing in Northern Ontario. Clim. Change Res. Rep. Ont. For. Res. Inst.
Hunt, L.M., Sutton, S.G., Arlinghaus, R., 2013. Illustrating the critical role of human
dimensions research for understanding and managing recreational fisheries within a
social-ecological system framework. Fish. Manag. Ecol. 20, 111–124.
Hunt, L.M., Ball, H., Ecclestone, A., Wiebe, M., 2023. Selected results from the 2020
recreational fishing survey in Ontario: Fisheries management zones, provincially
significant inland fisheries, and Great Lakes. Science and Research Technical Report.
Peterborough ON.
Kuparinen, A., Klefoth, T., Arlinghaus, R., 2010. Abiotic and fishing-related correlates of
angling catch rates in pike (Esox lucius). Fish. Res. 105, 111–117.
Lester, N.P., Dunlop, W.I., 2004. Monitoring the state of the lake trout resource: a
landscape approach. Boreal shield watersheds: lake trout ecosystems in a changing
environment CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida:293–321.
Lester, N.P.; Petzold, M.M.; Dunlop, W.I. Sample size determination in roving creel
surveys. Creel and angler surveys in fisheries management American Fisheries
Society, Symposium. Bethseda, Maryland: American Fisheries Society; 1991.
Malvestuto, S.P., 1983. Sampling the recreational fishery. In: Nielson, A., Johnson, D.L.
(Eds.), Fisheries techniques. American Fisheries Society, Bethseda, Maryland.
Parker, S., Krausse, M., Dunlop, W., 2006. Estimating angler effort from aerial surveys.
NWSI Tech. Rep.
Pollock, K.H., Hoenig, J.M., Jones, C.M., Robson, D.S., Greene, C.J., 1997. Catch rate
estimation for roving and access point surveys. North Am. J. Fish. Manag. 17, 11–19.
Pollock, K.H., Jones, C.M., Brown, T.L., Angler survey methods and their application in
fisheries management. Bethseda, Maryland: American Fisheries Society; 1994.
Rasmussen, P.W., Staggs, M.D., Beard Jr, T.D., Newman, S.P., 1998. Bias and confidence
interval coverage of creel survey estimators evaluated by simulation. Trans. Am.
Fish. Soc. 127, 469–480.
Robson, D., Jones, C.M., 1989. The theoretical basis of an access site angler survey
design. Biometrics 83–98.
Robson, D.S., 1961. On the statistical theory of a roving creel census of fishermen.
Biometrics 17, 415–437.
Robson, D.S. The roving creel survey. Creel and angler surveys in fisheries management
American Fisheries Society, Symposium. Bethseda, Maryland: American Fisheries
Society; 1991.
Rypel, A.L., Lyons, J., Griffin, J.D.T., Simonson, T.D., 2016. Seventy-year retrospective
on size-structure changes in the recreational fisheries of Wisconsin. Fisheries 41,
230–243.
Smallwood, C.B., Pollock, K.H., Wise, B.S., Hall, N.G., Gaughan, D.J., 2012. Expanding
aerial–roving surveys to include counts of shore-based recreational fishers from
remotely operated cameras: benefits, limitations, and cost effectiveness. N. Am. J.
Fish. Manag. 32, 1265–1276.
Smucker, B.J., Lorantas, R.M., Rosenberger, J.L., 2010. Correcting bias introduced by
aerial counts in angler effort estimation. North Am. J. Fish. Manag. 30, 1051–1061.
Soupir, C.A., Brown, M.L., Stone, C.C., Lott, J.P., 2006. Comparison of creel survey
methods on Missouri River reservoirs. North Am. J. Fish. Manag. 26, 338–350.
Stamatopoulos, C. Sample-based fishery surveys. A technical handbook FAO Fishery
Technical Paper, Rome: FAO. 425:1–132; 2002.
Steffe, A.S., Murphy, J.J., Reid, D.D., 2008. Supplemented access point sampling designs:
a cost-effective way of improving the accuracy and precision of fishing effort and
harvest estimates derived from recreational fishing surveys. N. Am. J. Fish. Manag.
28, 1001–1008.
Trudeau, A., Dassow, C.J., Iwicki, C.M., Jones, S.E., Sass, G.G., Solomon, C.T., van
Poorten, B.T., Jensen, O.P., 2021. Estimating fishing effort across the landscape: a
spatially extensive approach using models to integrate multiple data sources. Fish.
Res. 233, 105768.
Uusi-Heikkil¨a, S., Wolter, C., Klefoth, T., Arlinghaus, R., 2008. A behavioral perspective
on fishing-induced evolution. Trends Ecol. Evol. 23, 419–421.
van Poorten, B.T., Carruthers, T.R., Ward, H.G.M., Varkey, D.A., 2015. Imputing
recreational angling effort from time-lapse cameras using an hierarchical Bayesian
model. Fish. Res. 172, 265–273.
Venturelli, P.A., Hyder, K., Skov, C., 2017. Angler apps as a source of recreational
fisheries data: opportunities, challenges and proposed standards. Fish Fish 18,
578–595.
Weithman, A.S., Haverland, P., 1991. Comparability of data collected by telephone and
roving creel surveys. In: Guthrie, D., Hoenig, J.M., Holliday, M., Jones, C.M.,
Mills, M.J., Moberly, S.A., Pollock, K.H., Talhelm, D.R. (Eds.), Creel and Angler
Surveys in Fisheries Management American Fisheries Society, Symposium. American
Fisheries Society, Bethseda, Maryland.
C.M. Tucker et al.